XVIII. Tom Reveals His Dream Secret.
That was Tom's great secret, the scheme to return home with his brother
pirates and attend their own funerals. They had paddled over to the
Missouri shore in a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six
miles below the village. They had slept in the woods at the edge of
the town till nearly daylight, and had then crept through back lanes
and alleys and finished their sleep in the gallery of the church among
a chaos of invalid benches.
At breakfast Monday morning Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to
Tom, and very attentive to his wants. There was an unusual amount of
In the course of it, Aunt Polly said,
Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody
suffering most a week, so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity
you could be so hard-hearted as to let me suffer so. If you could have
come over on a log to go to your funeral, you could have come over and
give me a hint some way that you weren't dead, but only run off. Yes,
you could have done that, Tom, said Mary, and I believe you would, if
had thought of it.
Would you, Tom? said Aunt Polly, her face lightning wistfully. Say, now,
would you, if you'd thought of it?
I—
Well, I don't know. Toot has spoiled everything.
Tom, I hoped you loved me that much, said Aunt Polly, with a grieved
tone that discomfited the boy. It would have been something if you'd
cared enough to think of it, even if you didn't do it.
Now, Auntie, that ain't any harm, pleaded Mary. It's only Tom's giddy
way. He's always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything.
More's the pity, Sid would have thought, and Sid would have come and
done it, too. Tom, you'll look back some day, when it's too late, and
wish you'd cared a little more for me, when it would have cost you so
little.
Now, Auntie, you know I do care for you, said Tom. I'd know it better
if you acted more like it.
I wish now I'd thought, said Tom, with a repentant tone, but I dreamed
you anyway. That's something, ate it. It ain't much. A cat does that
much, but it's better than nothing. What did you dream? Why, Wednesday
night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the bed, and Sid was
sitting by the wood-box, and Mary next to him. Well, so we did. So we
always do. I'm glad your dreams could take even that much trouble about
us. And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here. Why, she was here.
Did you dream any more? Oh, lots, but it's so dim now. Well, try to
recollect, can't you? Somehow it seems to me that the wind—the wind
blowed. The—the—try harder, Tom. The wind did blow something. Come."
Tom pressed his fingers to his forehead an anxious minute, and then
said,
"'I've got it now. I've got it now. It blowed the candle.'
"'Mercy on us. Go on, Tom. Go on.'
"'And it seems to me that you said, Why, I believe that that door—'
"'Go on, Tom. Just let me study a moment. Just a moment. Oh, yes. You
said you believed the door was open. As I'm sitting here, I did. Didn't
I, Mary? Go on. And then—and then—'
"'Well, I won't be certain, but it seems like—like as if you made Sid
go and—and—'
"'Well? Well, what did I make him do, Tom? What did I make him do? You
made him—you—oh—you made him shut it. Well, for Lyon's sake, I
never heard the beat of that in all my days. Don't tell me there ain't
anything in dreams any more. Serenity Harper shall know of this before
I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her get around this with her rubbish
about superstition. Go on, Tom. Oh, it's all getting just as bright as
day now. Next you said I warn't bad. Only mischievous and harem-scarum,
and not any more responsible than—than—I think it was a colt or
something. And so it was. Well, goodness gracious, go on, Tom. And then
you began to cry. So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And
then—or then Mrs. Harper, she began to cry, and said Joe was just the
same, and she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd
throated out of her own self. Tom, the spirit was upon you. You was a
office-sion. That's what you was a-doing. Land alive. Go on, Tom. Well,
then, Sid, he said—he said—
"'I don't think I said anything,' said Sid."
"'Yes, you did, Sid,' said Mary. "'Shut your heads and let Tom go. What
did he say, Tom?'
"'He said—'
"'I think he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone to, but if
I'd been better sometimes—'
"'There, do you hear that?' It was his very words. And you shut him up
sharp. I lay, I did. There must have been an angel there. There was an
angel there, somewheres. And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with
a firecracker, and you told about Peter and the painkiller—just as true
as I live. And then there was a whole lot of talk about dragging the
river for us, and about having the funeral Sunday. And then you and old
Miss Harper hugged and cried, and she went. It happened just so. It
Tom, you couldn't have told it more like if you'd seen it. And then what?
Go on, Tom.'
"'Then I thought you prayed for me, and I could see you and hear every
word you said. And you went to bed, and I was so sorry that I took and
wrote on a piece of sycamore bark, We ain't dead, we are only off being
pirates,' and put it on the table by the candle. And then you looked so
good laying there asleep that I thought I went and leaned over and kissed
you on the lips.'
"'Did you, Tom? Did you? I just forgive you everything for that.' And she
sees the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the guiltiest
of villains. It was very kind, even though it was only—'A dream,' said
Soliloquyze, just audibly.
"'Shut up, Sid. A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he
was awake. Here's a big mylam apple I've been saving for you, Tom, if
he was ever found again. Now go along to school. I'm thankful to the
good God and Father of us all I've got you back. That's long-suffering
and merciful to them that believe on him and keep his word, though
goodness knows I'm unworthy of it. But if only the worthy ones got his
blessings, and had his hand to help them over the rough places, there's
few enough would smile here or ever enter into his rest when the long
night comes. Go along, Sid, Mary, Tom. Take yourselves off. You've
hindered me long enough.' The children left for school, and the old
lady to call on Mrs. Harper and vanquish her realism with Tom's
marvellous dream. Sid had better judgment than to utter the thought that
was in his mind as he left the house. It was this—
"'Pretty thin. As long as a dream is that. Without any mistakes in it.'
What a hero Tom was become now! He did not go skipping and prancing, but
moved with a dignified swagger as became a pirate who felt that the
public eye was on him. And indeed it was. He tried not to seem to see
the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food
and drink to him. Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels as
proud to be seen with him and tolerated by him, as if he had been the
drummer at the head of a procession, or the elephant leading a menagerie
into town. Boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away
at all, but they were consuming with envy nevertheless. They would have
given anything to have had that swarthy sun-tanned skin of his, and his
glittering notoriety, and Tom would not have parted with either for a
circus. At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and
delivered such eloquent admiration from their eyes that the two heroes
were not long in becoming insufferably stuck up. They began to tell
their adventures to hungry listeners, but they only began, it was not a
thing likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish
material. And finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely
puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached. Tom decided that
he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory was sufficient. He
would live for glory. Now that he was distinguished, maybe she would be
wanting to make up. Well, let her. She should see that he could be as
indifferent as some other people. Presently she arrived. Tom pretended
not to see her. He moved away and joined a group of boys and girls and
began to talk. Soon he observed that she was tripping gaily back and
forth with flushed face and dancing eyes, pretending to be busy chasing
schoolmates and screaming with laughter when she made a capture. But he
noticed that she always made her captures in his vicinity, and that she
seemed to cast a conscious eye in his direction at such times too. It
gratified all the vicious vanity that was in him, and so, instead of
winning him, it only set him up the more, and made him the more diligent
to avoid betraying that he knew she was about. Presently she gave over
to Tom, sky-larking, and moved irresolutely about, sighing once or
twice and glancing furtively and wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed
that now Tom was talking more particularly to Amy Lawrence than to
any one else. She felt a sharp pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at
once. She tried to go away, but her feet were treacherous, and carried
her to the group instead. She said to a girl almost at Tom's elbow with
sham vivacity,
Why, Mary Austin, you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday school?
I did come, didn't you see me? Why, no, did you? Where did you sit? I
was in Miss Peter's class, where I always go. I saw you.
Did you? Why, it's funny, I didn't see you. I wanted to tell you about
the picnic.
Oh, that's jolly, who's going to give it? My ma's going to let me have
one. Oh, goody, I hope she'll let me come. Well, she will. The picnic's
for me. She'll let anybody come that I want, and I want you. That's
ever so nice. When is it going to be?
By and by. Maybe about vacation.
Oh, won't it be fun? You going to have all the girls and boys?
Yes, every one that's friends to me, or wants to be. And she glanced
ever so furtively at Tom. But he talked right along to Amy Lawrence
about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning tore the
great sycamore tree all to flinders while he was standing within three
feet of it.
Oh, may I come? said Gracie Miller. Yes. And me? said Sally Rogers.
Yes. And me too? said Susy Harper. And Joe? Yes.
And so on, with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged
for invitations but Tom and Amy. Then Tom turned coolly away, still
talking, and took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled, and the tears
came to her eyes. She hid these signs with a forced deity and went on
chattering, but the life had gone out of the picnic now, and out of
everything else. She got away as soon as she could, and hid herself,
and had what her sex called a good cry. Then she sat moody with wounded
pride till the bell rang. She roused up now with a vindictive cast in
her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake, and said she knew what
she'd do.
At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant self-satisfaction,
and he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate her with a
performance. At last he spied her, but there was a sudden falling of
his mercury. She was sitting cosily on a little bench behind the
schoolhouse looking at a picture book with Alfred Temple, and so
absorbed were they, and their heads so close together over the book
that they did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world besides.
Jealousy ran red hot through Tom's veins. He began to hate himself for
throwing away the chance Becky had offered for a reconciliation. He
called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of. He
wanted to cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily along as they walked,
for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function. He
did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly
he could only stammer an awkward ascent, which was as often misplaced
as otherwise. He kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse again and
to sear his eyeballs with a hateful spectacle there. He could not help
it, and it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that Becky
Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the
living. But she did see, nevertheless, and she knew she was winning
her fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.
Amy's happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at things he had to
attend to, things that must be done, and time was fleeting. But in vain
the girl chirped on. Tom thought, Oh, hang her! Ain't I ever going to
get rid of her? At last he must be attending to those things, and she
said artlessly that she would be around when school left out, and he
hastened away, hating her for it.
Any other boy, Tom thought, grating his teeth. Any boy in the whole
town but that St. Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is
aristocracy. Oh, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw
this town, mister, and I'll lick you again. You just wait till I catch
you out. I'll just take and—
And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy, pummeling
the air and kicking and gouging. Oh, you do, do you? You holler enough,
do you? Now, then, let that learn you.
And so the imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction. Tom
fled home at noon. His conscience could not endure any more of Amy's
grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the other
distress.
Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but as the minutes
dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to cloud, and
she lost interest. Gravity and absent-mindedness followed, and then
melancholy. Two or three times she pricked up her ear at a footstep, but
it was a false hope. No Tom came. At last she grew entirely miserable and
wished she hadn't carried it so far. When poor Alfred seemed that he was
losing her—he did not know how—kept exclaiming,
"'Oh, here's a jolly one! Look at this!' She lost patience at last and
said, "'Oh, don't bother me! I don't care for them!' and burst into
tears and got up and walked away. Alfred dropped alongside and was going
to try to comfort her, but she said, "'Go away and leave me alone, can't
you? I hate you!' So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done,
for she had said she would look at pictures all through the nooning,
and she walked on crying. Then Alfred went musing into the deserted
schoolhouse. He was humiliated and angry. He easily guessed his way to
the truth. The girl had simply made a convenience of him, to vent her
spite upon Tom Sawyer. He was far from hating Tom the Less, when this
thought occurred to him. He wished there was some way to get that boy
into trouble without much risk to himself. Tom's spelling-book fell
under his eye. Here was his opportunity. He gratefully opened to the
lesson for the afternoon and poured ink upon the page. Becky, glancing
in at a window behind him at the moment, saw the act and moved on
without discovering herself. She started homeward now, intending to
find Tom and tell him. Tom would be thankful and their troubles would
be healed. Before she was half-way home, however, she had changed her
mind. The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she was talking about
her picnic came scorching back and filled her with shame. She resolved
to let him get whipped on the damaged spelling-book's account and to
hate him forever into the bargain.
CHAPTER XIX.
THE CRUELTY OF
I DIDN'T THINK.
Tom arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt
said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an
unpromising market.
Tom, I have a notion to skin you alive.
Auntie, what have I done?
Well, you've done enough. Here I go over to Serenity Harper, like an
old softie, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbish
about that dream, when, lo and behold you, she'd found out from Joe
that you was over here and heard all the talk we had that night. Tom,
I don't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that. It
makes me feel so bad to think that you could let me go to Serenity
Harper and make such a fool of myself and never say a word.
This was a new aspect of the thing. His smartness of the morning had
seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very ingenious. It merely
looked mean and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of
anything to say for a moment. Then he said,
Auntie, I wished I hadn't done it, but I didn't think.
Oh, child, you never think. You never think of anything but your own
selfishness. You could think to come all the way over here from
Jackson's Island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could
think to fool me with a lie about a dream. But you could never think to
pity us and save us from sorrow.
Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean it to be mean. I
didn't honest. And besides, I didn't come over here to laugh at you
that night. What did you come for, then? It was to tell you not to be
uneasy about us, because we hadn't got drowned. Tom, Tom, I would be
the thankfulest soul in this world if I could believe you ever had as
good a thought as that. But you know you never did, and I know it, Tom.
Indeed, indeed, I did, Auntie. I wish I may never stir if I didn't. Oh,
Tom, don't lie. Don't do it. It only makes things a hundred times
worse. It ain't a lie, Auntie. It's the truth. I wanted to keep you from
grieving. That was all that made me come. I'd give the whole world to
believe that. It would cover up a power of sins, Tom. I'd most be
glad you'd run off and acted so bad. But it ain't reasonable, because
why didn't you tell me, child? Why, you see, when you got to talking
about the funeral, I just got all full of the idea of our coming and
hiding in the church, and I couldn't somehow bear to spoil it. So I
just put the bark back in my pocket and kept mum.
What bark? The bark I wrote on to tell you we'd gone pirating. I wished
now you'd waked up. When I kissed you, I do honest. The hard lines in
his aunt's face relaxed, and a sudden tenderness dawned in her eyes.
Did you kiss me, Tom? Why, yes, I did. Are you sure you did, Tom? Why,
yes, I did, Auntie, certain sure. What did you kiss me for, Tom? Because
I loved you so, and you laid there moaning, and I was so sorry. The
words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in her
voice when she said,
"'Kiss me again, Tom, and be off with you to school now, and don't
bother me any more.' The moment he was gone she ran to a closet and got
out the ruin of a jacket which Tom had gone pirating in. Then she
stopped with it in her hand and said to herself,
"'No, I don't dare.' Poor boy, I reckon he'd lied about it. But it's a
blessed, blessed lie. There's such a comfort come from it. I hope the
Lord I know the Lord will forgive him, because it was such good-heartedness
in him to tell it. But I don't want to find out it's a lie. I won't look.'
She put the jacket away and stood by, musing a minute. Twice she put out
her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained. Once more
she ventured, and this time she fortified herself with a thought,
"'It's a good lie. It's a good lie. I won't let it grieve me.' So she
sought the jacket pocket. A moment later she was reading Tom's piece of
bark through the flowing tears and saying,
"'I forgive the boy now, if he'd committed a million sins.'
CHAPTER XX. Tom takes Becky's punishment.
There was something about Aunt Polly's manner when she kissed Tom that
swept away his low spirits and made him light-hearted and happy again.
He started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky Thatcher at
the head of Meadow Lane. His mood always determined his manner. Without
a moment's hesitation he ran to her and said,
"'I acted mighty mean today, Becky, and I'm so sorry. I won't ever,
ever do that way again. As long as I ever live, please make up, won't
you?' The girl stopped and looked at him scornfully in the face.
"'I'll thank you to keep yourself to yourself, Mr. Thomas Sawyer. I'll
never speak to you again.' She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so
stunned that he had not even presence of mind enough to say,
"'Who cares, Miss Smarty?' until the right time to say it had gone by.
So he said nothing. But he was in a fine rage, nevertheless. He moped
into the schoolyard wishing she were a boy and imagining how he would
trounce her if she were. He presently encountered her and delivered a
stinging remark as he passed. She hurled one in return and the angry
breach was complete. It seemed to Becky, in her hot resentment, that she
could hardly wait for school to take in. She was so impatient to see Tom
flogged for the injured spelling-book. If she had had any lingering
notion of exposing to Alfred Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it
entirely away. Poor girl! She did not know how fast she was nearing
trouble herself. The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an
unsatisfied ambition. The darling of his desires was to be a doctor, but
poverty had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village
schoolmaster. Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and
absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting. He kept
that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school, but was
perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. Every boy
and girl had a theory about the nature of that book, but no two theories
were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case.
Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she
noticed that the key was in the lock. It was a precious moment. She
glanced around, found herself alone, and the next instant she had the
book in her hands. The title page, Professor Somebody's Anatomy,
carried no information to her mind, so she begun to turn the leaves.
She came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored frontispiece,
a human figure, stark naked. At that moment a shadow fell on the page,
and Tom Sawyer stepped in at the door and caught the glimpse of the
picture. Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck
to tear the pictured plate half down the middle. She thrust the
volumes into the desk, turned the key, and burst out crying with shame
and vexation.
Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be to sneak up on a person
and look at what they're looking at. How could I know you was looking
at anything? You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer. You know
you're going to tell on me, and I—I—what shall I do? What shall I
do? I'll be whipped, and I never was whipped in school.
Then she stamped her little foot and said,
Be so mean if you want to. I know something that's going to happen.
You just wait, and you'll see. Hateful, hateful, hateful! And she flung
out of the house with a new explosion of crying.
Tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught. Presently he said
to himself,
What a curious kind of a fool a girl is. Never been licked in school.
Shucks! What's a licking? That's just like a girl. They're so thin
skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I ain't going to tell old
Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting
on her that ain't so mean. But what of it? Old Dobbins will ask who it
was tore his book. Nobody'll answer. Then he'll do just the way he
always does—ask first one, then tether, and when he comes to the
right girl he'll know it, without any telling. Girls' faces always tell
on them. They ain't got any backbone. She'll get licked. Well, it's a
kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because there ain't any way
out of it. Tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added,
All right, though. She'd like to see me in such a fix. Let her sweat it
out. Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a few
moments the master arrived, and school took in. Tom did not feel a
strong interest in his studies. Every time he stole a glance at the
girl's side of the room, Becky's face troubled him. Considering all
things, he did not want to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to
help it. He could get up no exaltation that was really worthy the name.
Presently the spelling-book discovery was made, and Tom's mind was
entirely full of his own matters for a while after that. Becky roused
up from her lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the
proceedings. She did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble
by denying that he spilt the ink on the book himself, and she was
right. The denial only seemed to make the thing worse for Tom. Becky
supposed she would be glad of that, and she tried to believe she was
glad of it, but she found she was not certain. When the worst came to
the worst, she had an impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple. But
she made an effort, and forced herself to keep still.
"'Because,' said she to herself, "'he'll tell about me tearing the
book, sure.' I wouldn't say a word not to save his life." Tom took his
whipping and went back to his seat, not at all broken-hearted, for he
thought it was possible that he had unknowingly upset the ink on the
spelling-book himself in some skylarking bout. He had denied it for
Tom's sake, and because it was custom, and had stuck to the denial from
principle. A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his
throne, the air was drowsy with a hum of study. By and by Mr. Dobbins
straightened himself up, yawned, and then unlocked his desk and reached
for his book, but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it.
Most of the pupils glanced up languidly, but there was two among them
that watched his movements with intent eyes. Mr. Dobbins fingered his
book absently for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his
chair to read. Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and
helpless rabbit look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head.
Instantly he forgot his quarrel with her. Quick, something must be done,
done in a flash, too. But the very imminence of the emergency
paralysed his invention. Good, he had an inspiration. He would run and
snatch the book, spring through the door, and fly. But his resolution
shook for one little instant, and the chance was lost. The master
opened the volume. If Tom only had the wasted opportunity back again,
too late. There was no help for Becky now, he said. The next moment
the master faced the school. Every eye sank under his gaze. There was
that in it which smote even the innocent with fear. There was silence
while one might count ten. The master was gathering his wrath. Then he
spoke,—
"'Who tore this book?' There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin
drop. The stillness continued. The master searched face after face for
signs of guilt. "'Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this book?' A denial.
Another pause. "'Joseph Harper, did you?' Another denial. Tom's
uneasiness grew more and more intense into the slow torture of these
proceedings. The master scanned the ranks of boys, considered a while,
then turned to the girls. "'Amy Lawrence!' A shake of the head. "'Gracy
Miller.' The same sign. "'Susan Harper, did you do this?' Another
negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trembling from head
to foot, with excitement and a sense of hopelessness of the situation.
"'Rebecca Thatcher!' Tom glanced at her face. It was white with terror.
"'Did you tear—no, look me in the face!' Her hands rose in appeal.
"'Did you tear this book?' A thought shot like lightning through Tom's
brain. He sprang to his feet and shouted,—'I done it!' The school
stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a moment to
gather his dismembered faculties, and when he stepped forward to go to
his punishment, the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that shone
upon him out of poor Becky's eyes, seemed pay enough for a hundred
floggings. Inspired by the splendour of his own act, he took without an
outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr. Dobbins had ever
administered, and also received with indifference the added cruelty of a
command to remain two hours after school should be dismissed, for he
knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done, and
not count the tedious time as loss, either. Tom went to bed that night
planning vengeance against Alfred Temple, for with shame and
repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting her own treachery,
but even the longing for vengeance had to give way soon to pleasanter
musings, and he fell asleep at last, with Becky's latest words
lingering dreamily in his ear. Tom, how could you be so noble?